---
ID: 34
post_title: 'Microvita and Tantra Maya, Introduction and Ch.1 &#8220;The Ellipse and Hunab Ku&#8221;'
author: Quetzal Eckhart
post_date: 2005-11-25 13:52:12
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: >
  http://elmisterio.org/microvita-and-tantra-maya-ch-1-the-ellipse-and-hunab-ku/
published: true
war_soundy_enable_bg_sound:
  - default
war_soundy_enable_pp_corner:
  - default
war_soundy_audio_file_url:
  - default
war_soundy_audio_type:
  - default
war_soundy_audio_volume:
  - default
war_soundy_audio_title:
  - default
war_soundy_autoplay:
  - default
war_soundy_loop:
  - default
---
This work was originally written as the final part of my first published work, A Name To The Nameless. I decided it was a little too divergent from the material of the main body of the work. I have therefore decided to publish it as a separate work. Included are some parts of A Name To The Nameless as an introduction to the current work about Microvita. The portions of A Name To The Nameless will help the reader to more easily understand the Microvita and Mentity treatise in part IV at the end of the book. Part IV can also be read independently. 

I was first introduced to the concept of Microvita in 1993. Anandamurti had just left his physical body a few years before. People hoped that he would have been able to expound further on this new, revolutionary subject that he only began to speak about in the last few years of his life. However, he was able to establish a certain theoretical framework for very intuitive minds to study. This theoretical base helps orient the inquisitive intellect in the right direction. According to the great Tantric preceptors, like Anandamurti, there are subtle methods and theoretical models, or pratima, that are created by very intuitive minds with the design of helping the conceptual and creative minds of the students to delve into the secrets of the intuitive mind. 
	
If it weren't for this theoretical structure, then the science of Tantra would be as loosely defined as any other experimental, shamanic system. Tantra undoubtedly has its pre-historic roots in practices akin to shamanism. It is said that the great Sadashiva systematized this very free, experimental, and non-centralized practice of pre-historic Tantra indigenous to the Indian sub-continent. Tantra then became a more methodical and systematic form of spiritual practice designed to expand the mind from the dullness of materialism and instinctuality. Throughout the ages the great sages have revived this ancient science, each in his or her peculiar way.  Anandamurti was a modern reformer of this Tantric tradition as well. He re-systematized these practices to make them more applicable to the modern, universal human culture. They are very subtle, yet sure and solid practices that anybody with a little discipline and spiritual awareness can begin to practice. For more advanced meditators he gave special types of meditation for the study of microvita. 
	
I have always been fascinated with the ideas of Microvita. I met some very developed yogis who had made some very great advances in these studies. Most successful were the most pure and spiritual meditators. Many of them didn't have complex, conceptual minds that could give a rational explanation to a physicist, for example. However, there were a few of them that did have this spiritual insight combined with a developed conceptual mind that could give a very clear and logical explanation to intellectuals conditioned to think with scientific methodology. All of these yogis influenced my thinking and my desire to know more. Knowledge of Microvita isn't essential for spiritual realization, just like knowing how to fix a car isn't necessary for one to drive a car. However, this science does have some very practical applications in the sciences and arts. Most importantly, is the understanding of how our deepest intelligence is really embedded in the Tao, the Macrocosmic Mind. 
	
I came to learn of the Tantra Maya practices in a very curious manner.  One summer I passed through very deep and intense meditations.   It was during the most intense and horrific times of the so-called “narco war” in Mexico. The terror only pushed our community further into our meditations to try to survive and mentally and spiritually process the absurdity of war. Taking the stance of warriors, we decided not to let anything affect our determination to continue with our spiritual lives. One day, while in deep, still silence, I started to see all kinds of images arise in my mind.  They intruded and interrupted the silence, formless and breathless. Awakening back into my discerning mind, I immediately recognized these thought forms as Mayan symbols.  While these symbols appeared I felt like there was some guide or professor explaining the deep significance of each of them- the pyramid, the seba tree, as well as many peculiar sounds and meditation mantras.  There were few images, but the explanations were so vast.  Perhaps these ideas only lasted a few moments but they were packed full of deep, meditative ideas.  I continued enjoying these inner sessions thinking that I was simply tapping into the store of collective memories, or akashik records.  Thinking that I had discovered some secret Mayan yoga, I told my daughter about them.  She laughed and said they were all practices that she had learned when she was 7 years old from her Mayan teacher, Quetzal Manik, or White Feather.  Around that same time we got word that Quetzal Manik had just passed away at over 110 years of age. 
	
Most people that have experiences like this fall into the error of thinking they are channeling some dead spirit.  One becomes a “shaman” and goes on pilgrimage to Palenque or Sedona. Through lack of an understanding of the deeper layers of mind, one thinks that one has become a medium.  Meditation is a technique to concentrate on the inner I-Witness behind all mental phenomenon.  Here is infinity and it is only in this inner bliss that the mind becomes free of all fetters.  Occult vision is definitely a fetter as seen from this point of view.  Instead of seeing the infinite One beyond the confines of the relative mind, one becomes enamored with interesting information that passes through the relative medium of mind.  Most egos can’t handle the information and end up going off on some kind of “spiritual” ego trip as they fall into the traps of name and fame at having achieved some “paranormal” ability. 
	
I have never looked for this knowledge. Whatever little understanding I think I have is only because my mind was quiet and free of intentionality when these experiences ocurred. My experiences with this information make more sense the less I think of this information as coming from a disembodied spirit.  Although I do feel a distinct presence, the experience comes across more as a “download” of information rather than some kind of dialogue with a deceased spirit, However, I don't totally reject the idea that something of that particular mind was present in these experiences.  Furthermore, the nature of this information was purely spiritual and was revealing certain universal laws of spirit instead of the idiosyncrasies .  There was no language describing these forms, just pure ideas.  These ideas comport very well with the Indian Tantra that I am more familiar with. 
	
I tell of this experience as a practical example of microvita. Microvita science is a science that can only be properly understood when the entire mind has become an object for the immortal Atman, the I-Witness of mind. It is only when there is this clarity of self-understanding ensconsed in the Supreme Subjectivity of the Atman that it is possible for one to see a little of the inner dynamics of heaven. Microvita science is something much more subtle than spiritism in that there is essentially no recognition of any spirit apart from the eternal spirit of Atman. All spirits are but sparks of the Atman. Only the Atman can understand its own creation. Atman is the Supreme Consciousness and Supreme Subjectivity who sees all events in all places of the universe. 
	
The Tantra Maya practices of Quetzal Manik are definitely Tantric in origin, as they are, in some aspects, identical to those of eastern forms of Tantra.  If one reads the Tibetan Tantric Texts one sees that they are basically transposed forms of Indian Tantra that influenced Tibetan Tantra.  Although each has their uniqueness, it is so easy to see that words and concepts for Brahma, Shiva, or Shiva were simply called "Shunya," or "Void" in Tibetan Tantra.  Quetzal Manik was definitely a theist, however he had a certain Buddhist mystique of not getting too caught up in names for what is so transcendentally vast and beyond our little conceptual minds.  For him, as for all Tantrics, spiritual realization is based on sadhana, or spiritual practice. 
	
In Indian Tantra, the active, dynamic definition of Spirit or Atman is called Shiva- the “great god.” The Mayan Tantrics call It "Hunab Ku," the Cosmic Nuclueus, the nucleus of all nuclei in the universe.   Spirits, or microcosmic minds, are termed “deva,” or gods.  Devas are sparks born out of the Shiva. They all radiate around the Cosmic Nucleus of Hunab Ku.  A deva refers to any microcosmic mind, embodied or disembodied, from ant to angel. All beings evolve back into oneness with the Shiva or Hunab Ku.  Just as all microcosmic minds in this planet make up the Gia, or Earth Mother, all of the microcosmic minds in the universe make up the Macrocosmic Mind, the Tao current that underlies and inter-weaves our deep, inner lives in a “dance of the blessed spirits.” This work is an attempt to explain such subtle, natural experiences in light of the rigorous philosophy and intuitive spiritual practices of Tantra. 

Everything in this universe is in constant change.  The Vedas call the universe <i>jagat</i>, that which is in constant movement.  As the whole universe is in movement, nothing ever remains the same.  Perfection is a transcendent ideal not to be found in the physical, changing universe. Euclidean forms only exist in the realm of imagination, and not in the physical world.  Einstein has even shown that the path of a photon is not direct as its trajectory curves toward large, gravitational bodies like a star.  All things in this Macrocosm interact by pushing  and pulling on each other. 

The Vedas also speak of how the universe is elliptical, like an egg.  The orbits of planets around celestial bodies as well as the orbits of moons around planets are all elliptical.  Gravity is a polar force.  There are both centripetal, or center-seeking forces, and centrifugal, peripheral-seeking forces.  Sometimes the centrifugal force is greater, and sometimes the centripetal force dominates.  In the case of celestial bodies orbiting a star, the centripetal force is greater when the radius of the orbit is closer to the star.  The centrifugal force dominates when the planet is at its greatest radial distance from the star.  The relative existence of anything in this creation is determined by the balance of centripetal and centrifugal forces.  If the centrifugal force is too great, then a celestial body may be released from its star or planet and flung into outer space by its centrifugal force unchecked and balanced by the centripetal, center-seeking force.  If the centripetal force is too great, then the celestial body will be absorbed into the greater body that it orbits.    All depends on the balance of these two opposing, yet complementary forces. 

In the philosophy of Tantra Maya, like that of Taoism and the I-Ching, or Book of Changes, this basic idea of polarity is seen as an underlying principle in the Macrocosmic creation.  These are binary systems of thinking in which balance and insight are attained through the subtle understanding of the relationship between the centrifugal and centripetal forces, the yin and yang, respectively.   One can also call the centrifugal force the “positive,” outward-moving force and the centripetal force would therefore be the “negative,” inward moving force. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> The mystically-oriented Mayan astronomers, through very deep meditation, unified their minds with these fundamental forces to understand the Macrocosmic workings of these forces and their relationship to the physical universe.  Seeing from beyond Time in inward meditation on the Cosmic Nucleus, or Hunab Ku, they were especially insightful about the phases of the elliptical orbit of our solar system around the center of the Milky Way Galaxy.  So many people nowadays are turning toward these ancient systems of understanding to try and find a deeper meaning and relationship of human life with the Macrocosm. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Any ellipse is formed by the adjustment of centrifugal and centripetal forces.  As a planet moves around this ellipse there are various seasons of the year.  Certain nature mystics, like the Mayan astronomers. also noticed that there are subtle effects on the planet’s gravitational fields which, in turn, effect not just our biology but our psychology as well.  Our minds naturally find a comfortable association in the understanding of these phases and the most insightful minds always see natural phenomenon as the lode-star for all human happenings.  In short, we are much more connected to everything than our conceptual minds can understand. Everything depends upon our lived, intuitive connection with the living, <i>jagat, </i>moving universe.  Poetic Seers  like Rumi, Tagore and Shakespeare understood these truths and expressed them so naturally in their words and song. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;"> Any ellipse in the Macrocosm has a controlling nucleus, a Hunab Ku at the Consciousness Center of the centripetal-centrifugal dualistic interplay. In Indian tantra, the Cosmic Nucleus is called Shiva. This work will use the concepts and terms of Shiva and Hunab Ku interchangeably. The Cosmic Nucleus intervenes in this natural energetic interplay to Consciously bring orbiting ellipses closer to its center.  Shiva’s eternal responsibility is the balance of the entire Macrocosmic Order of the living, conscious universe. Hunab Ku or Shiva exists within every microcosmic heart and mind and is the aim of our process of evolution.  Every heart and mind, consciously or unconsciously seeks shelter in the grace of union with the Cosmic Nucleus.  This Cosmic Nucleus is ultimately beyond any energetic duality.  Shiva remains the Witness, the Commander Zero beyond all things multiple.  Thus, Shiva controls all of the vibrations from its nucleus, which are his devas.  In the physical world this subtle Energy or Shakti manifests as gravity with the centrifugal-centripetal interplay.  The subtle devas ride these elliptical waves and give a few  gentle, invisible pulses on cruder, electromagnetic fields.  In the mental, conscious world in which we inhabit, Consciousness is always present whether the mind is in close proximity, or whether the centrifugal force has taken the mind further from its central nourishment in the subtle beauty of Shiva.  The science of Microvita requires the attempt to put all of one’s vigor- physical, mental and spiritual- into this Cosmic Nucleus.  Shiva is the heart of all hearts, the reason of all reasons, and is within every microcosmic crown.  From here, in this center the inner-I sees only the radiant white beauty of the Himilayan Shiva or the White Feather of Hunab Ku. </span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">Every object that exists was created by gravity and everything that exists has its gravitational center. The earth revolves around the sun and the sun around the galaxy and all galaxies pull on each other. What is meant by the term “Cosmic Nucleus” or Hunab Ku is not a physical nucleus like the planet, or sun, or galaxy, but rather the cosmological hub from which all of this creation springs forth. If all that existed were material and with a material cause, then this nucleus might have a physical, gravitational center. However, through spiritual contemplation and meditation one discovers deep truths of perennial wisdom; that the body and this physical universe is a relative play of consciousness in time and space but internally and essencially we are all intimately linked to the Cosmic Nucleus. Therefore, it is Consciousness that is the true Cosmic Nucleus. Consciousness is the center and essence of all things created. When we speak of the Cosmic Nucleus it is rather the hub or nuclear consciousness on which revolves all activity, be it the sublime activity of the mind of Brahma or the idleness of Mr Nobody.
</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">It has been said by great seers of the “perennial philosophy” of all times and places that the Supreme Being is always with us and that we are co-creators or microcosms in this vast universe or macrocosm. Although many proclaim this great truth, it is much easier said than lived. The external world with all of its demands and uncertainties seems much more real and concrete than this apparently abstract spiritual idea. So we compromise ourselves with this relative world and place our spiritual lives on hold until we have time for meditation and spiritual practice after first securing ourselves in the “practical world.” With such a limited idea guiding one’s life it is very easy to lose one’s higher ideals as they give sway to material pursuits and eventually lose momentum over time. The mental projections of external desires, conformity and conventionality take the place of the soul. The only thing that brings us back to our souls is the fact that this world is never enough. Although family, work, creativity and a love for this world may be very deep pursuits, they are limited and ultimately mean nothing if not sustained by the Cosmic Nucleus. We all yearn for nothing more to bask in this light.</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">
This light radiates down to purify our every distortion and shadow we have created along evolution’s way. The faithful and patient mind turns inward and moves upward toward the Infinite and experiences an eternal deja vu feeling of having arrived at a home so well-remembered but also forgotten. This Cosmic Nucleus is always so near that we don’t even notice it. Its not somewhere off behind the Playedes or Orion constellations, nor is it in some heavenly realm beyond our access. It lies hidden within one’s very feeling of existence, of “I exist.” The Cosmic Nucleus is the “I-Witness,” the entity that witnesses, that is the base for the I-feeling. It is not the little “I” or ego but is the fundamental awareness behind all ephemeral expressions of the “I” consciousness. So to know this supreme knower is not to know it as some fact or place or object for the mind. The Upanishads ask, “how can the knower be known?” Consciousness is not an object for even the finest philosophical speculation; It always remains as the Supreme Subject. If it is truly the I-witness, then the path must begin with awareness and responsibility of the notion of “I exist.”</span></span>

<span style="font-family: DejaVu Sans,sans-serif;"><span style="font-size: medium;">
Most people belittle the existential I-feeling by confusing it with the little “I” or ego. The “I” is pirated by the separation and fear of the notion of limited existence in a hostile world that keeps us bound to materialism and low instincts. Spiritual practice is the beginning of the introversion of the mind’s activities toward the I-Witness. Instead of focusing on some philosophical idea, absolutist religious ideal, or conceptual form, the spiritual aspirant focuses the mind with the question “who am I?” and begins to focus and feel what the I-feeling really is. It is such a deep path with so many levels. There are so many latent feelings and thoughts that come out in this process, but it ultimately leads to a purification in which we feel the purity of the I-feeling is without limits. “God” ceases to be a concept but becomes the Eternal Now, the immediate presence of consciousness behind my “I”. And it is only when this feeling of “I” is free from limited, egocentric thinking and feeling that one discovers the inherent bliss of existence; that existence has never been something separate but has always been a source of bliss awaiting all microcosms on the path of spiritual evolution. The difference between the our inner, quiescent “I” and Shiva is so fine, almost non-existent, like the line between shadow and shade. And such is our union; the microcosm begins to reflect itself as an image, a replica of the Macrocosm. The restless monkey consciousness awakens into the divine. Will there someday be no difference? So we must learn to trust ourselves and listen only to Om, the voice of Shiva, within. No matter how far the orbit of mind is away from the Cosmic Nucleus, it is only Here in its immediate, conscious presence that the infinite riddles of existence begin to be resolved.</span></span>