
While I was a student at UT, a group of drunken fraternity boys  pushed a piano through a window that fell 10 floors and killed 2 people in the street below. As if there were not a better use for a grand piano! All of these bone-heads got together and decided they were not responsible. They collectively blamed the victims. "Why were those stupid people walking the streets at 3 am?" they argued. My professor of social psychology marveled at this phenomenon of "cognitive dissonance." Cognitive dissonance is a mental state that occurs when there is a major contradiction in the habitual thought structures of the ego. The ego seeks consistency with its thoughts and projections so that there is a centered and consistent self-concept.  A powerful event that is different and contradicts the projections of its habitual reality creates a state of dissonance and inner tension in the mind. Instead of being only superficial and frivolous boys, they are now guilty of killing innocent people. They thought they were good people, perhaps the best, and now they are seen as criminals. To neutralize this cognitive dissonance, this state of tension induced by a great contradiction and confusion to the ego's reality, one has to invent excuses that serve the confused ego and create an acceptable story so that one can continue thinking in the same way as before so that one's projections  about “reality” are not contradicted and interrupted. The defensive and guilte psyche must avoid at all costs this painful state of cognitive dissonance. We are all cognitive misers and always look for easy excuses and pretexts rather than the complex truth. If you can not find an excuse, then you live in torment. In the case of frat boys, they can not bear the social censure and personal guilt and simply pass the blame on some "other". This is, of course, much easier when each individual has the rest of the "team" supporting him.

These superficial socialites with the Greek letters were often conformist nationalistic and patriotic types that become model citizens and good leaders in business and government. Does the irresponsibility of these students reflect the reality of Capitalist, Neo-Liberal society in general? Under Capitalism, we live in our isolated world and only care mostly about our own selfish well-being, or perhaps only our near and dear ones. Most peoples aims are based only in material comfort which tends toward excess.  Who thinks about the consequences; the environmental degradation, economic exploitation of other people on the planet, and widespread degeneration of the human soul trapped in this  materialistic, deterministic cage that so much of our world has become? How many people are concerned about economic wars and our military-industrial complex that undermine democracy by sabotaging the economies and governments of weaker nations?  Do such acts create psycho-social illnesses?  Can a society become mentally ill when we disintegrate almost all of the fundamental human values by accepting lies like Vietnam, Afghanistan, or Irak?  We are constantly forced (at least if we are honest) to see how our society so often goes against democracy and humanism.  At the same time we try and maintain the idea that we are the most humane and democratic.  Can all of this confusion and coercion at the individual and social cognitive levels make us ill individually and collectively?  I believe the answer is all around.

Perhaps most people are just like repressed frat boys on the inside. Is it a cold indifference or simply a flagrant ignorance that we ignore planetary reality and prefer to watch TV, eat Big Macs, and buy strange things to fill our spiritual and existential emptiness? Who will criticize me if everyone is living in the same way, each in our own island?  It can not be bad if everyone else is part of the scheme, if some national and/or social sentiment gives one an opiate to filter anything that creates this cognitive dissonance. Why not go on raising the flag a little higher than one's cognitive dissonance? Or perhaps buy something new to fill an inner void?  Our selfishness and conformity enables individuals and society to continue their impunity and irresponsibility. 

How will the mundane and selfish mentality ever change and take responsibility for the damage that is being created around the world with such a petty, self-centered bias which serves nothing but the base appetites? Most people who follow this kind of superficial ideology do not care about what happens to people in other places, as long as they continue to live in narcissistic overabundance. Their ideological distortions hide the ugly truth that they have to kill others to steal the natural resources and brutally exploit the labor of others.  That's why hardly anyone in the US  will believe that there is a genocide in our "Back Yard," in Mexico and Central America, for example.  Our predatory lifestyle and political ignorance is responsible for so much destruction and suffering for the rest of the planet and its people. Under globalist capitalism, the first world is the parasite of the third.

Personally, I have received great benefits by being born in the US: a good family, education and a safe environment in which to live. However, things change when one peers out of the false security bubble of "The Truman Show." With humane culture and meditation one develops a natural, spiritual and universal consciousness. It is natural that one's socio-spiritual awareness expands and one begins to see and understand the terrible things that the politicians, bankers and corporations are doing to the world. So that a few can live in wretched excess, the masses of humanity have to live in misery. And for what end? The modern materialistic society of the United States is so full of mental pathologies that people often end up suffering more than the oppressed and exploited in the third world. Often I see more light in the eyes of the indigenous who live under tin roofs in the mountains than in the people of modern suburbs where I grew up. Though poor and forgotten, at least those people still have a piece of land and have not been forced into overcrowded urban slums to be devoured by the capitalist matrix. There are still people who are truly of this earth.

However, this situation is an absurd instability that can not last. At present there is an internal revolution within the intelligence systems of many governments around the world. Whistle-blowers are emerging from behind so many nooks and crannies. There is a division between those who would sustain national solidarity against the will of the imperialist multinationals that benefit from this spread and perpetuate the violence that makes us all enemies. We overvalue their knowledge and power. Its existence is based on nothing more than the destruction and distortion of material and social reality. Behind the power that we give them by our continued acceptance of their fabricated reality, they are actually insecure and fearful people hiding behind the status-quo that they have created. Their only power is that our weaknesses and acceptance of their lies have not given us no other solutions than their distortions, exploitation, and wars of annihilation. Whether American, Israeli, Mexican, etc., intelligence officials know that it is a show of blatant lies that cover a brutal reality and that their states are manipulated by bankers and multinational corporations. Intelligence is a two-edged weapon. These people whose profession is a lie and create war and destruction are in a deep part of their psyche actually well aware of the weaknesses in their networks of lies. No matter how sick and distorted their minds have become there is always a live witness that sees through their game of lies. They are not dumb beasts, but degenerate intellectuals. There remains some portion of an inner intelligence that makes them uneasy and restless. 

Whether we are speaking of the corruption and exploitation in our government, religion, or social group, the dynamics of power and mental manipulation within these distinct structures share a common psychological ground. We enter this world weak and ignorant and we require much struggle and effort to overcome these debilities, whether they be physical, mental, or spiritual weaknesses.  Some people are more strong while others are weak, some are more sharp and others are dull.  The strong  lead or control the weak. Such is the law of nature at all levels: physical, mental, and spiritual. The only problem with this law is how we define "strength" and "weakness" and how people are treated in accordance with those definitions.  When leaders become too empowered and selfish, they begin to exploit their followers economically, socially, and ideologically.  Eventually their dogmas, prejudices, policies become completely corrupt and go against the common good.  Then begins the process of  manipulation that trick us into believing and following something we should not.  And finally tyranny and repression toward all who resist their hypocrisy and impunity.  This cycle causes untold harm to individuals and just as certainly as it brings death to empires.  This is essentially the same pattern for all types of social manipulation and spin-doctoring whether we are speaking of the exploitation of the ignorant and weak by the shrewd and strong in the religious, economic, cultural, racial or class structures. 

When rational and moral human beings are forced to believe in something irrational and immoral, we become fragmented, we are overcome by cognitive dissonance. We can never develop a clear picture of reality because the cognitive models we acquire about ourselves and our worlds are so often very contradictory.  From the yogic point of view, the Aham or feeling of "I am" can never reconcile itself with the Mahat, the pure feeling of "I exist" which is eternal and pure.  The "I-am" or ego is midway between the inner and outer worlds and so is in part socially conditioned.  It is not really separated from the Mahat within, only limited definitions of the ego make it appear as such.  Without liberatory spiritual culture we are stuck in an imposed and warped definition of the "I am" that doesn't permit us to see the true "I" within.  Dogmatic ideology would have that or mental development remain in the lower rungs of the Aham or ego, far away from the self-reliant and vastly intelligent qualities of the Mahat or true "I" within.  This is a natural human duality that dogmatic ideology tries to exploit by keeping us enslaved to matter and the market, to class and color, or perhaps within some church with some savior.  We become neurotic individually and collectively as a result. Some people may not be strong enough to protest and take a stand. This is unfortunate because the exploiters and perpetrators usually continue in their downward fall into even more gross and perverse actions which require even more cover-ups. Such is the self-condemning path of the lie; one has to keep lying to cover up previous lies until eventually one is trapped in an escapable quagmire of psychotic non-reality.  

I recently wrote about one such <a href="http://elmisterio.org/tantra-of-the-light-and-the-dark/">example of injustice in a spiritual society</a> not just because I am taking a stand within that one particular society to resist injustice, but also because the psychological dynamics of this example are just so universal when we examine the dynamics of brain-washing. Abuse of power leading to crimes, then the conspiracy to cover up, blaming the victims are the universal path of the lie for all that tell it, be it the state, a church, or some other expression of human society. The result is further and further degeneration with this web of lies and mental illness until we reach absolute disintegration or revolution.  

If we combat these universal thought distortions of power and manipulation and understand how they work, then we will have taken at least a chunk out of the monstrous structures of power that we humans create and carry in our mind-body system, in our DNA. I believe that if the principles of this revolutionary society were actually practiced and taught by the leaders, then they would be doing their part to reduce the load of distortion and cognitive dissonance weighing upon the collective mind of humanity, instead of adding to it. Only by finding discernment, the perfect balance of universal love and reason, will we be able to remedy our frailty and lack of true faith in our inherent power of reason and love.  This fault has permitted us to accept the lies and manipulations of others. The infinite Consciousness is beyond name and form, freely available to all.  It lies with our own "I-feeling" or Mahat.  These warped beliefs were created in our weak egos by spiritual scheisters;  they fermented there because we couldn't see an alternative, we couldn't conceive of something higher, or the belief gave a false sense of security. It is only in this confused mental space that the powers that be can impose their dogmas.  Our pinnacled reason and moral responsibility must dissolve these false mental structures that only serve to make us all ill. As such we may begin to purify the collective consciousness of humanity.

To reflect and resound these lies back to them is the duty of all who love liberty and seek a better and more balanced world. Leaders play the game of psychological terror, as well as actual, aggressive terror. Should we not find a more subtle and intelligent way to return this package? Should we not rise above their petty little ideologies and feelings with the highest universal humanism and spiritual strength to reflect their hell back upon them? Make the mind a laser that penetrates through this darkness to send this mass of foul lies back to the perpetrators. This refined interior tantric light will protect you personally and help repel their attacks on our collective human society. We must tap our reserve forces in the deepest part of the mind to defend against this degeneration and impunity. Neurosis and psychosis is the natural result of most people who do not renounce the path of lies and destruction. Let them destroy themselves rather than others. The stronger you are as a universal human being, the more their own distortions fall back upon them. There is some good that torments this fragmented and sick state of existence.  Their weakness is in the same point as their cognitive dissonance and false consciousness. What does the shrewd capitalist know of the greater forces in the universe, these demons who exploit and kill for finite matter, poor ideology and petty ego? Perhaps some will change, but most eventually be devoured by their own psychopathology because of such internal distortion. They are cunning, but a deeper moral intelligence connects us to true power and knowledge in the universe. They do not know the power of Tao, of dharma, the universal moral order of the universe. A mind without spiritual awareness is like a ship lost at sea, full of holes, and sinks slowly.

The leaders and also their followers also carry the burden of truth through the lie. Those who accept the popular lies also pay the price in the end. Although most are not aware that they are ultimately working towards truth, even through his own degeneration. The materialistic and narcissistic example of existence with all its pathology has given proof to the world of its non-sustainability and its inevitable madness. This giant collapsing on itself is teaching many lessons to the world of how not to live.
