---
layout: post
title: The Gaze of The Assassin and the Mind of Buddha
comments: true
tags: 
  - Spiritual Tantra
  - Social Tantra
published: true
---










It was a Sunday with the family on the ranch.  A man from the local village arrived on a 4-wheeled motorcycle.  He was a person that did some occasional work for us.  He was very drunk and came to ask me for money.  I denied him but he implored.  I just told him that he should spend the money I give him on food for his family so that his children don't have to come and ask me for food.  There was no way I would give him any money so that he could continue harming himself and his family with his blind and rampant drunken rampages.  His eyes flared with hatred and he started to descend from his motorcycle to attack me.  I prepared to defend myself but knew that he would not be permitted to touch me.  I had no intentions nor interests rather than that his family is provided for and knew that the universe would protect me from him.  He saw I was not afraid, got back on the motorcycle, peeled out and started hauling ass out of the ranch.  In order to leave the ranch he had to make a sharp turn where there was only about 15 feet of space before the parallel fence in which between was the road that led to the entrance.  He was going about 30 mph when he realized he was going too fast and would not make the turn.  He turned so sharply that he flipped over the motorcycle due to the inertia.  He went flying like a cross, arms wide-spread and flying swiftly through the air after being flung from the tumbling motorcycle.  He flew about 20 feet almost perfectly parallel to the ground in his trajectory until his erect body unified with a wooden railway post that we use to hang our gate.  It was buried 4 feet into the ground with the desert soil packed solidly all of the way down.  Now, to this day, the post is crooked.  

He hit the post straight on and bounced back in the opposite trajectory from which he arrived, landing 6 feet away from where he smashed against the post.  I was certain that he was dead.  However, it is a common fact that drunk people often survive accidents because their bodies are so loose and uncoordinated that their bones don't break or muscles don't tear.  I was amazed at his brute strength.  He got up after a minute and then fell back down again.  While I looked for one of his family members to come and bring him home on a donkey my friend counseled him to stop drinking.  He spit blood out of his mouth and said "never."  

I was impressed with this synchronicity.  I was so keenly aware that his threat against my person was immediately followed by this accident.  I went back into my mental registry to see what I was thinking during and after this confrontation.  My mind was very clear and I remembered my every thought.  I knew he couldn't hurt me but I was ready to call the Saint Bernard for a snack if he made one bad move.  He was terrified of this monstrous dog who always used to bite him in the rear when he worked here.  Machismo is a false front, it is all about fear and dogs sense this.  Almost all men around here fear dogs.

While he was peeling off and leaving I only thought that he had better be careful because he is offending an innocent person who has a lot of protection behind him.  I did not wish him any evil but I knew that he would get an immediate reaction to his actions.  While these thoughts percolated to the surface of my mind I am seeing him crash the motorcycle and become airborne.  

This happened 8 years ago, before our Apocalypse.  Those were the "good old days" when the local degenerates were just beer guzzlers.  Now they have all moved on to crack and work for the narco-traffickers who have taken over the valley.  People are so terrified and now they easily give into pressure from local politicians to sell their lands.  Corporations end up owning these lands and the mountains. There is a huge gas reserve beneath us that many local and even national politicians have invested in.

These narcos are into everything.  They are into all levels of government and nobody with a little social awareness can deny that Mexico is a Narco State.  I have never met an honest man or woman in the Mexican government.  There may be a few honest civil servants, but above these levels, all are corrupt.  Each party has their cartel allegiances and they are really fighting a masqueraded civil war via the national cartel conflicts.  They also always end up taking over local mafias or developing their own illicit trades like kidnappings and serving as hit-men for the multinationals and local bureaucrats.  Around here the main local businesses seems to be meta-amphetamine production and human organ removal, two prime export products to the people of the U.S. packed with the most hellish suffering imaginable from Central America and Mexico.  Here is the north of Mexico and the narcos have their own border patrol for immigrants trying to get to the U.S.  Many disappear and nobody asks about them, nobody wants to know their fate.  Most stories like the following don't make it into the news, but this one was just too big.  Only a few kilometers from here there was found a dump with thousands of disconnected body parts.  There is no explanation, no suspects, just an impression of terror left for all who hear and view such news.  

They have small paramilitary camps darted all throughout the valley.  Each one has a few men with machine guns and bazookas.  One of these camps is nearby and there is a man on a 4-wheeled motorcycle who drives by with his machine-gun strapped to his shoulder.  It conjures up memories and I know they will suffer the same fate as the drunk from years earlier if they try anything nasty.  I could hear the motorcycle coming from far away and so I ran down to the corner of our property to meet him.  I wanted to see if a human being could be so evil, and see into the eyes of a murderer to see where the person is, if there still exists a person within that shell of wicked existence.  I just observed him.  He passed by and acted like he did not see me.  He turned my way again and nodded in a friendly manner, looking for confirmation that he was okay with me.  He seemed really insecure and wanted some friendly confirmation.  I was stunned.  I could feel that he did not want to tangle with me, but rather sent me a friendly nod.  I suppose even human butchers need to have some form of social interaction.  I saw him from within the Buddha Mind as a part of this essence, so how could he not have a Buddha within, waiting in some dark hell to be liberated from such sufferings.  I may judge him socially as a danger to human society; I may even strike him if he tried to harm us, however it is now impossible to believe that there is not at least some goodness in the most evil of people.  I thank Reality for showing me this.  

How can I judge him when people like me, from my country, are the root cause of this situation?  We must exploit the earth and kill whoever lives above the surface of its resources to fuel our McMansions, drive our gas guzzlers, and eat our Big Macs.  Undermining Latin American democracies is the par excellence of the imperialists and the evil elite will eventually pay the price as well.  Actually, they are already suffering their reactions.  It is an error to think that those above are living well.  American society is an insane asylum, and the mental patients come from all walks of life.  The more they over-accumulate, live superficially and narcissisticly, and kill others in the process, the more neurotic, addicted, and over-medicated the whole society must become.  It is as difficult to find an upright and honest man in Mexico as it is in the U.S.  They are rare treasures.  Ultimately, the highest and the lowest are in the same mundane rungs of material existence, in the lower realms of hell. They are a perfect reflection of each-other.  The poor of the 3rd world are created in the sick image of the imperialists.  Those from above have more choices and freedom yet don't utilize their education nor conscience to change anything, and so that makes them even a little more despicable than even the narcos.  It is harder to see them within the Buddha Mind, yet it is possible.

Every time we sing kiirtan to create a positive vibration, he comes out on the motorcycle.  I think he likes us because he detected us as peaceful but does not know how to show it.  The first few times he came with his gun and just observed from far away.  Next, he came without his weapon and just drove around in circles like a mad man.  These experiences were explained in earlier stories: <a href="http://tantramaya.org/two-recent-encounters-with-the-santa-muerte/">http://tantramaya.org/two-recent-encounters-with-the-santa-muerte/</a> 

Very positive vibrations frighten very negative people.  Even the violent drunk who crashed realized something of the law of karma.  Each time he thought about us negatively, he had a minor accident and confessed this to his wife who later told us.  Mundane people cannot understand the laws of spirit and subtle energies.  Even sophisticated intellectuals who have little introspection and natural harmony know nothing of the higher realms of Mind that work for our well-being if we would only let them.

The other morning I started playing requiem music again for the bad guys in the area. They never live long and every time they start to get too curious about why we haven't abandoned our home to them, something always happens and they never return. New death soldiers come to inhabit the old places and then they die and this cycle has happened time and time again. I was in meditation retreat even before they arrived I became one with the spirit of the desert. I feel these new arrivals as if they entered inside my own mind and I have struggled to comprehend what it is they do and why they do it. They know their time is short and so they worship the Santa Muerte. However, there is still a small part of them that is still human and suffers. 

After seeing that narco demon on the motorcycle that I mentioned in a link on the previous post, I finally realized what Anandamurti meant when he said that there are humans that are even less conscious and sensible than animals and are really no longer even human in their minds. Rather, they are like demons. However, I still see a spark of consciousness behind all of this. It doesn’t manifest, but because it is still conscious it has what seems like infinite shame and self hatred (two fundamental self-conscious tendencies) and a desire to escape this mental hell. Killers are the most unhappy people imaginable.  It is no wonder that after I saw the eyes of that assassin that I felt that he had intense desires to commit suicide. I don’t want to get near that dark energy, but it now seems so clear as to why such dark mental parasites exist. Maybe it is just like a physical parasite, but in the mental realm. It has its place in nature to maintain balance, but sometimes it gets out of control. These energies can never touch one whose mind surrenders to the Supreme Consciousness; they only attack minds that are too engrossed in violence.  Low self esteem is a form of self-hatred, albeit in a much milder sense than in the narco assassin. Many good people who lose their confidence and faith in life have opted for this way out of their problems as well, but suicide is only a victory for the illusionary ego. One came to believe that there was nothing else than one's little, miserable self.  We should never attach judgement to these ideas about suicides because sometimes people have the most profound sufferings that would be inimaginable for us to conceive.  The only way out is through deep insight into suffering, like my Buddhhist friends sincerely tell me. This realization gives one compassion for all beings that suffer in this apparently crooked, rickety wheel of existence. This distorted ego concept of control over ones imaginary self is a defense against an underlying self-hatred for one’s own fear based, and self-centered mental creation that has gone awry and lost its purpose and guiding function.  One despairs, then later makes some poor judgements. Life requires great ideas, or else we are done for, as one is crushed under this cruel wheel of mundane existence.  Everything depends upon one’s ideation and outlook. Like Blake said:

“Love seeketh not itself to please   

Nor for itself hath any care  

But for another gives its ease    

And builds a heaven in hell’s despair.”

Meditation and kiirtan keep away these and other negative microvita that erroneous human minds are proliferating. Our greatest defense against them both physically and mentally is our devotion and that terrifies the narcos just as much as it does the negative microvita. We won’t let them control us with their terror, and thereby direct the destiny of our minds and spirits. Our lives have a higher purpose and our eternal well-being is stamped and sealed if we have just a little bit of devotion.  Without even trying, our spiritual energy sends their dark motives back upon them. Kiirtan is the greatest defense because it is an act of surrender to the I-Witness that brings positive spiritual force, positive microvita. Our war is one of will, faith, and reason against materialism, lies and destruction and as well as the thoughts and energies behind these delusions.
