---
layout: post
comment: true
title: The Eternal Recurrence
tags: 
  - Spiritual Tantra
published: true
---







{% capture images %}
	/images/relampago.png
{% endcapture %}
{% include gallery images=images caption="" cols=3 %}

Nietzche spoke of a rather odd phenomenon that he called the "Eternal Recurrence."  According to this theory the reality that we construct by our own free will repeats itself eternally.  We may try to escape our freedom by taking refuge in social conventions, traditions, religion, or philosophical systems, but they are all always projections of our limitations, weaknesses, and our desire to escape this radical freedom that we have somehow inherited.  In the end we always confront ourselves and our projections, eternally.  He was deeply immersed in Buddhist literature as a Sanskrit philologist and this idea seems to be a very original and subjective interpretation of the archetypal idea of reincarnation that he surely encountered in his studies. 

When I was 22 my mentor Chidghananda spoke to me of my supposed past lives.  He only did this because I playfully tricked him into it.  I knew he wouldn't tell me anything, so, instead I asked him to verify if what I thought I knew was true or not.  He said, "Okay, tell me, what do you know?"  I mentioned a few details from recurrent dreams and then he then elaborated on them.  When he saw that his vision extended mine and that he was telling me new information, he laughed and said "You got me."  I knew he could see very deeply into Reality although he rarely spoke about occult issues.  He was a true yogi, a classic Upanishadic contemplative with a great devotional heart and didn't get lost on psychic or occult issues.  I "tricked" him to speak a little on this subject of reincarnation.  However, what he told me was very very serious and took away all sensational mystique of this phenomenon.  He only told me what I already knew, really.  He barely exceeded that, and only clarified what were for me new revelations about my inner life.  Nobody had ever guided me so clearly in my personal development.  I had two very loving grandfathers in this earthly life, and Chidghananda beamed with the love of a hundred noble grandfathers.    He always spoke of his guru, whom he called "Baba."  "Baba was Baba, a complete mystery," he always told me.  He was an infinite mystery that he (Chidghananda) never tried to capture in any final, dogmatic conception.  

There were also some other spiritual grandfathers.  Some went on into _moksha_ at death (union with the godhead and no re-birth, similar to the idea of Nirvana), but many took _mukti_ (liberation from reincarnation but oneness with the eternal activity of the Cosmic Mind of Brahma or G.O.D.- Generator, Operator, Destroyer.) Those who enter into _mukti_ wait for the absolute emancipation of _moksha_ while they remain active and united with the Cosmic Mind serving the entire universe. They can get a lot of work accomplished because they are at one with the infinite and eternal activity of the mind of Brahma as opposed to being at one with the godhead beyond generation, operation, and destruction of the created universe that comes from the infinite source of the godhead.  Even the ones that went into moksha left some important gifts before their absolute union with the Infinite One beyond even the mind of Brahma.  They were a non-local, decentralized force for their departed guru and continue to pass on that sublime shakti within the collective mind of the living disciples from now into the future.  Chidghananda never died for me.  When he left his physical body I felt him near me whenever I thought of him.  He showed me the way to the guru in life and he only continues to do so in death.  Our Dead Dada's Society is everywhere and nowhere; it is super-personal, decentralized, cosmicly free and wild.

Chidghananda told me that my work was done, and that I only had to a little more of a martial form of meditation, or _sadhana_.  Other than that, I had no other duties.  Sure, he told me I could write books, raise money for service projects or help out in any other way if possible, but my only real duty was to fulfill my spiritual duty with this sadhana.  After so many years of trying to understand this, I came to the conclusion that those days were but an experience of liberation from past samskaras (reactions to previous actions).  I was free to create new actions in the present, not blindly or impulsively, but with compassion and conscience.  This liberation has more to do with the realization of the inner "I" rather than the outer "I am" of the ego or personality.  The personality may still exist but it has no past nor pending desires.  One becomes innocent and simple.  Memories of life begin to be whitened, purified and unified in the eternal present beyond recurrence, even the eternal recurrence.  Yet Chidghananda further told me that I would pass through inconceivable sufferings but that I would never fall because the guru would guide even these difficult adventures.  Sure enough, there has been nothing but conflict and resolution, but also a little revolution.  Falls were controlled falls, always below and to the left.  

The dice of the gods are loaded.  No actions are original or separate.  Free will only exists in theory.  When the past ceases to exist then the ego is a mirage and the question of "free will" becomes silly and infantile.  Only Brahma (The Macrocosm in itself) is real, yet one must continue to choose and act in the human world while paying the eternal sacrament of sacrificing the fruits of "independent" action into the eternal fire of Brahma.  Hence, the Cosmic Show, the Headkick Headtrick Tantra as an eternal recurrence.

While I am hesitant to speak of past lives or future lives, I do think it is important to recognize the idea of "reincarnation" if we know that it really effects us in an experiential, phenomenal manner.  I think it is more important to see repeating cycles within ones present incarnation rather than try to see them in previous ones.  Shrii Cube once told me that he never wanted to know his past lives because he is only just beginning to understand his present one.  Nature is intelligent enough to show one's samskaras through this very life if one develops a little intuition.  Life itself teaches all of the patterns of conditioning, both inherited and aquired, by always bringing us back to where our issues lie.  

I had a strong spiritual awakening at 21 years of age.  Concurrently, I got caught up in an absurd revolution in West Bengal, India, where I was accused of being an arms dealer.  It was absurd because I was an innocent philosophy student hanging out at an Indian ashram and knew nothing of the mafia side of Ananda Marga which linked us to the arms.  Ananda Marga introduced me to Indian intelligence, Interpol, and the CIA.  I wanted nothing to do with this scene.  I came to distrust most people who wear uniforms in Ananda Marga, and I still do.  I always retained a deep reverence for my teachers at Ananda Nagar, however.  Very few people in Ananda Marga were complicit with the CIA, but they were very key people who have helped disintegrate that organization.

Last year, at age 42, I passed through another spiritual storm even stronger than when I was 21.  I had not been around Ananda Marga for 15 years but I heard news of how they want to sue us for publicly promoting their supposedly universal mantra, "Baba Nam Kevalam."  We even got a death threat from an Avadhuta preist who kicks  non-compliant monks in their heads.  I wrote absurd stories about their corruption and hypocrisy to reflect back upon them their own absurdities, hence "The Headkick Headtrick Tantra."  At the same time I went to visit the CIDECII, a cooperative university that serves the indigenous Zapatista communities of Chiapas.   I was actually spiritually inspired by their example of selfless service and heroic determination for justice.  These people really did achieve something in their social struggles, unlike Ananda Marga which has all but disintegrated, well, except for a few Headkickers and other nut-cases.  

Soon after the visit with the CIDECII I was under surveillance once again.  I realized that the CIDECII was the think-tank of the most successful and progressive revolutionary movement on the continent.  Of course Big Brother is watching over them, they are the Zapatistas! My gmail and facebook accounts were hacked, my telephone was intervened and all internet activity was stifled.   

I spent 6 months under house arrest in India waiting for our case in the Arms Drop case in which I came out completely clean.  Police were always watching me during that time.  While being watched I would joke with my Irish friend using my own thick Irish accent imitation that the Indian military police could not understand very clearly.  I made jokes about their sadistic leiutenant's "fat arse."  We roared with laughter always.  Last year, here in the present in Mexico, we have had many visits from many dangerous people- military, paramilitary, corporate military, narco-assassins and even a spy who later confessed.  They always seemed to come on days when I had very high meditations and no harm ever came to us.  Geronimo says they can go and frack themselves.

And so here we go again on the upward spiral path of eternal time, like a mountain pass that spirals upward.  Each spiral trip and return to previous points is a little higher and one can see the past with more clarity.  These higher cycles become shorter and faster and ever so more intense as we strive for the apex point in the Atman.
