
I was an admirer of the Zapatistas since the first videos that I saw early in 1994 when Commander Ramona, an ex-nun Zapatista rebel commander, led the attack to take San Cristobal de las Casas in Chiapas. Even though they had machine guns and were fighting I could see that they were very dignified people by the look in their eyes behind their masked faces. The noble eyes behind their masked faces as well as the brightly-colored indigenous clothing underneath bullet belts and machine guns revealed who these rebels truly were: organic farmers. I felt there was an invisible grace guiding them. I didn't quite know why, but I just felt this very strongly as a first impression. It was a very lucid realization for me that awakened a strong sense of social and moral responsibility and activism. Later, the brilliant, humane discourses of the Zapatista commanders and sub-commanders like Ramona and Marcos revealed that there was such a beautiful and humane spirit guiding them. They won so many hearts around the world with their earnest discourse. Although I was a student in the U.S., I was drawn to them and attended some talks by Liberation Theologists priests that were Zapatista sympathizers who came to speak at the University of Texas at Austin.

I was soon distracted from the Zapatista movement, however, by my involvement with some yogis in India who turned out to also be revolutionaries. Although I admired Indian yogi-revolutionaries like Aurobindu and Subash Chandra Bose, I was personally more yogi than a revolutionary and I thought of these Ananda Marga yogis more as monastic social activists like Vivekananda who practiced and taught yoga to keep themselves and human society physically, mentally and spiritually strong. I never thought of them as the machine gun or grenade carrying types until they made a debacle of an arms drop from a Russian airplane full of machine guns, rocket launchers and grenades over their main ashram in Purulia, India. [embedyt] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UylCK2A2Ue0[/embedyt]

As a liberal arts student that had just graduated the university, I went to an Ananda Marga ashram to do doctoral studies on tantra yoga when the arms drop occurred.  Far from being an mere academic experience, I was becoming deeply immersed in the very high spiritual vibration at Ananda Nagar.  It was clear that much spiritual work had been done in this environment.  I felt that my meditation was 5 times as strong there!  By just closing the eyes, one enters into deep, effortless meditation in such an environment.  Despite all that has happened with Ananda Marga, those experiences always help me remember that the philosophy and spiritual practices of Ananda Marga have a very pure origin.

After a nice meditation one morning I hear there was an arms drop in a nearby village and then the military arrived.  The arms drop was a typical botched-up Ananda Marga operation and the arms fell in the wrong place and it was reported to the local police and military.  They discovered it just in time.  The simple locals live like people from thousands of years ago.  They discovered these unknown objects which had very nice boxes and canvas bags.  At the time they were making cob houses and were just about to throw some sturdy hand grenades into the cob mixture.  

I was immediately thrown in jail with a few other people but soon released under house arrest. I wasn't allowed to go anywhere, but just to stay within Ananda Nagar and continue to enjoy deep meditation.  I was questioned by the Indian CBI but they weren't interested in my testament.  I think it was the file clerk that they used to briefly question me.  However, I should have suspected that they questioned one of our arrested companions for a very long time.  I didn't think much of it at the time.  

The public scene around A.M. after the arms drop was all very fun, especially when I was used as a public speaker to defend A.M. in front of the press.  It was all a game to me until I realized I didn’t know what was really going on and was unknowingly lying to the BBC and India Times when the A.M. Central press secretary sent me to give interviews. Several months went by before I recognized the faces in the newspapers as those of Ananda Marga monks who had been visiting the ashram with our arrested companion that was thoroughly questioned by the CBI.  They were planning the arms drop at this time. All the while I was helping A.M. to blame their old foe, the communist party of Bengal, of falsely defaming Ananda Marga like they did so many times in the past.  Needless to say my academic studies were terminated and I was deported after we were declared innocent in court.  An official told me I would be blacklisted by immigration and would not be able to return to India.  He was being friendly and told me I just needed a new passport with a different name in order to come back to his country.  I changed my legal name from Enckhausen to Eckhart only to try to go back to India, but A.M. became a living hell for the honest monks, nuns, and lay members and it was no longer possible for me to return.  Since then the organization has done nothing but diminish due to internal strife, <a href="http://elmisterio.org/tantra-of-the-light-and-the-dark/">scandal and political conflict.</a>

The producer of the documentary cites another author that considers it is likely that Kim Peter, or Nirvananda, was aided and protected by the CIA. The producer leaves the question open for scrutiny.   Some people in A.M. were informants to the CIA and the senior members of the organization knew of this. Kim Peter worked in North America with a gang of A.M. monks. He is still seen as a Robin Hood type of figure.  In the beginning, they only smuggled electronics into India to raise money for orphanages and schools. However, they later moved on to greater ventures. Many members of this underground mafia extended into immoral and dangerous international mafia connections. Some were caught and forced to be informers to the FBI and the CIA. I knew who some of these people were and I think they were used as tools to help frame Ananda Marga as a terrorist organization. After the Purulia arms drop Ananda Marga was placed on the FBI’s top 10 global terrorist groups list for several years. Now, they are practically non-existent in North America.  However, we must thank them immensely for showing us a bad example of Ananda Marga. They have made it very clear what Ananda Marga is not and have perhaps liberated this great philosophy from a corrupt international crime family that Ananda Marga has become.
     
Philosophically speaking, I have always favored non-violent ideas and a more strict idea of ahimsa or non-violence. The idea of "just" wars has always disturbed me but war is a reality of this world that always haunts the pacifist. The Zapatista revolution helped me see that sometimes the most moral and responsible people have to make these most difficult decisions and truly take action. I had just finished studying Steinbeck's "The Grapes of Wrath" at the end of 1993 and was reminded so much of the mentality of Steinbeck's Jim Casey (J.C.), ex-preacher turned revolutionary, kind of like Comandante Ramona. Whenever I thought of the Zapatista plight I remembered my internal revelations and the look in the eyes of the rebels and I simply hoped that these good people would be guided from on high. However, the Ananda Marga failure made me see how extremely difficult such a revolutionary decision really is. Certainly West Bengal needed a revolution against the communist dictators, but they did not have the popular support of the people.  Ananda Marga fell so short of victory in this humiliation and instead showed the world with this and each new and continued scandal that it was but a spiritual mafia with a really twisted and corrupt vanguard of priests.   Now they only vaingloriously preach the words of their master like silly parrots without having done anything productive and substantial in decades. Those people remain within. Those few left who are really doing the work are forced to be rebels and work outside of the corrupt organization. Their projects continue because they truly help people and people in turn help them.

Just after the Zapatista revolution and during the Ananda Marga debacle, the subtle discourses of the Zapatista commanders like Ramona and Marcos showed the world that the Zapatistas were not violent terrorists but very noble and dignified people who had no other alternative for the survival of their indigenous culture other than taking up arms. Their allies of Liberation Theologists, intellectuals, humanists, and righteous hippies soon came to their aid and have since then formed a very positive international society of humanist-intellectual activists to ally the indigenous Zapatista revolutionary community. They voluntarily put down their arms without surrendering them and have instead been building schools and cooperatives for the indigenous communities of Chiapas and have been the most powerful and recognized voice of resistance against capitalist globalization.

Anandamurti, the preceptor of Ananda Marga, wasn't anti-violence in the strict since like Gandhi. He saw a well-planned revolution as humane in that there is a quicker end to injustice when peaceful means are exhausted. However, he never said "it is time, let us revolt and start a war now." My opinion is that he would have been very pleased with the revolution of the Zapatistas, their ideals, and the fruit to come from those actions and ideals. I see nothing closer to the ideals of Prout co-operativism and economic decentralization (the social outlook of Anandamurti) than with the Zapatistas. I am afraid the wayward disciples of Anandamurti who planned the Ananda Marga arms drop lacked the discernment of when to use force (what else is a huge airplane full of weapons dropped over their main ashram to be used for other than violence?) because they ended up in utter humiliation and have endangered their whole social movement thereby. They ended up making it on the FBI's top ten terrorist list for several years. If these amateur revolutionaries wouldn't have attempted the arms drop and other shady activities they would have only had to deal with the negative propaganda of the very corrupt and dubious Indian government and would perhaps still have some respect in the world eye.  The Ananda Marga monks tried to become as divine as they claim their guru was.  Their quixotic vanity made them fall into an underworld that they have yet to get out of.  The Zapatistas rose up from below.  From great humility they have attained great prestige.

I don't doubt that the fall of A.M. was aided by international intelligence that always protects the global capitalist system. The quick rise of Ananda Marga in India during the 60's and 70's made many people nervous. Neither the Indian CBI nor the CIA wanted this spiritual and social revolutionary movement to spread beyond India, as it quickly did. Nowadays, after the death of the great leader, Anandamurti, this expansion has stopped and the movement falls apart everywhere. I recently heard about an Oxford publication where the author speaks of A.M. as a jihadist movement! Although this is far from the truth, it is true that Ananda Marga is no longer such a vigorous and respectable movement and it certainly isn't an easy task being an Anandamurti apologist! If the social and spiritual ideals of Anandamurti are in fact true and tested, then they will live on, perhaps in better ways and forms, and with practical examples.

One does not hear of anybody calling the Zapatistas a jihadist movement, however. Perhaps one would if they would have failed. I admire the Zapatistas for their courage to confront a Hydra physically much more powerful than they. However, what I respect most about this movement isn't only that they were great warriors but that their continued success has really been sustained by a very well coordinated international solidarity movement and a very deep indigenous wisdom guiding them. Instead of building batallions, they are building schools and developing their communities sustainably with a very dignified collective spirit.  When I hear their maxim "Para todos todo, nada para nosotros,"(For everyone everything, nothing for us) I can't help but hear the Perennial Philosophy of non-dualism sprouting up from Chiapas in a very unique, special and rebellious color. However, I love the fact that there is no religion or sectarianism for the Zapatistas. It is much more interesting to see their silent, natural spirituality manifest through honest sincerity and practical humanist ideals.
It has had a very unique effect on modern human consciousness, at least for those who have approached them. I really do see them as dignified organic farmers who would rather be with their families on their land instead of having to fight another war. I try not to even consider the idea that there could be war again. I don't think it is out of fear of violence but rather the belief that there are also undiscovered and unseen ways to fight a revolution against petty materialists. If peaceful, conscious, and collective organization and the moral dedication to a new ideal of living was not working, then they still would not be around after all of these years and would have been annihilated by the Mexican government. They obviously have had the support of enough people to have made their movement a success. The mature rebels of the world have to keep helping them and other non-vanguard and local grass-roots movements to continue to move forward in peace and a wise resolution of these seemingly insurmountable problems that the whole planet faces under the Capitalist Hydra.
