---
ID: 4100
post_title: Dogma, Doctrine, and Spiritual Anarchy
author: Quetzal Eckhart
post_date: 2016-12-23 16:58:49
post_excerpt: |
  Advaita is pure anarchy, spiritual anarchy. Not even the best ideas control the mind under this philosophy, much less governments or institutions. The idea of Oneness of spirit in all beings, an "Oversoul" behind all particular minds, reveals the greatest inner freedom and bliss. At the same time this vision inspires a sacred duty toward ethical action in harmony with this common spirit. Instead of promoting and projecting an immature and selfish bourgeois freedom, one's conscience demands truth in all aspects of existence. Without the torch of conscience, lies and delusion distort one's freedom and make mundane, dualistic existence a cage for the soul. Congruence with one's deepest conscience and holding to it under all circumstances is the greatest defense against dualistic, separate thinking and all of its manifestations in our human world. Spiritual anarchy, the spontaneous, natural, and intuitive order and organization stemming from a state of social and existential chaos, has its roots in a profound respect for other beings that transcends name and form. Spirituality must be a truly unitive force instead of a divisive one. If it is true, then there are good fruits for all. If untrue, then it poisons the minds of individuals and creates disunity in the world.
layout: post
permalink: http://elmisterio.org/4100-2/
published: true
war_sdy_pl_playlist_title:
  - default
war_sdy_pl_enable:
  - 'no'
war_sdy_pl_pp_corner_enable:
  - default
war_sdy_pl_enable_soundtrack_download:
  - default
war_sdy_pl_scrolling_enable:
  - 'no'
war_sdy_pl_scrolling_height:
  - "10"
war_sdy_pl_outer_box_width:
  - default
war_sdy_pl_playlist_outer_box_width_value:
  - "100"
war_sdy_pl_playlist_outer_box_width_unit:
  - '%'
war_sdy_pl_font_size:
  - default
war_sdy_pl_playlist_font_size_value:
  - "80"
war_sdy_pl_playlist_font_size_unit:
  - '%'
war_sdy_pl_autoplay:
  - 'no'
war_sdy_pl_play_mode:
  - seq_from_first
war_sdy_pl_loop:
  - 'no'
war_sdy_pl_soundtracks:
  - default
war_sdy_pl_yellow_select_id:
  - ""
war_sdy_pl_column_layout:
  - default
war_sdy_pl_column_order:
  - default
war_sdy_pl_column_ordered_names:
  - index,title,artist,composer,time,id
war_sdy_pl_column_do_display_index:
  - 'yes'
war_sdy_pl_column_width_value_index:
  - "24"
war_sdy_pl_column_width_unit_index:
  - px
war_sdy_pl_column_do_display_title:
  - 'yes'
war_sdy_pl_column_width_value_title:
  - "25"
war_sdy_pl_column_width_unit_title:
  - '%'
war_sdy_pl_column_do_display_artist:
  - 'yes'
war_sdy_pl_column_width_value_artist:
  - "25"
war_sdy_pl_column_width_unit_artist:
  - '%'
war_sdy_pl_column_do_display_composer:
  - 'yes'
war_sdy_pl_column_width_value_composer:
  - "25"
war_sdy_pl_column_width_unit_composer:
  - '%'
war_sdy_pl_column_do_display_time:
  - 'yes'
war_sdy_pl_column_width_value_time:
  - "42"
war_sdy_pl_column_width_unit_time:
  - px
war_sdy_pl_column_do_display_id:
  - 'no'
war_sdy_pl_column_width_value_id:
  - "3"
war_sdy_pl_column_width_unit_id:
  - '%'
war_sdy_pl_picture_enable:
  - default
war_sdy_pl_picture_url:
  - ""
war_sdy_pl_picture_width:
  - "0"
war_sdy_pl_picture_height:
  - "0"
war_sdy_pl_picture_title:
  - ""
war_sdy_pl_picture_link_url:
  - ""
war_sdy_pl_picture_link_new_tab:
  - ""
war_soundy_enable_bg_sound:
  - default
war_soundy_enable_pp_corner:
  - default
war_soundy_audio_file_url:
  - default
war_soundy_audio_type:
  - default
war_soundy_audio_volume:
  - default
war_soundy_audio_title:
  - default
war_soundy_autoplay:
  - default
war_soundy_loop:
  - default
xyz_fbap:
  - "1"
anonymous_comments:
  - 'on'
anonymous_comment_authors:
  - 'a:1:{i:0;s:5:"Mr_Ed";}'
---
For the past 6 years our spiritual community has been in a constant state of alert. Here in this part of Mexico the narcos control the government. Their paramilitary operations are but extensions of the political machinery of the Narco State. Each political party has a preferred cartel. Sometimes the narcos fight against the military when there are changes in politics and one competing cartel is favored over another through dirty mafia politics. At other times the military protects their heinous activities that extend far beyond drug trafficking with kidnappings, land-grabbing, serving as guns for hire as corporate hit-men, and human organ harvesting. They do the dirty work of counter-revolution that the state cannot take credit for, yet owes its continued existence to. Around here it is common to see these invasive neighbors riding around with AK47s in broad daylight. They force people to sell their land, which ends up being owned by local politicians to be sold to corporations for mining or gas exploitation. People who call the military authorities to denounce them end up dead.

Besides maintaining the internal spiritual integrity within our own eco-village and spiritual family, the next most essential element for surviving this holocaust is organizing activities with the local community. So many people here have been incorporated into the illicit activities of the narcos. Almost all of the men of the local village are employed by them as lookout scouts. Many were thieves and alcoholics to begin with and the now easily available drugs like crack and meth have made them even more degenerate and insane. However, there are still several good families that are resisting this terrible situation. We try and connect with as many of them as possible. Here we meditate with Huicholes, Catholics, Buddhists, and Yogis. These friends each consider us one of them, and vice-versa. This level of respect is only possible because of the dynamic created by our interaction. If true unitive and spiritual synergy is being generated then it is something greater than all of our ideas as it unites our various and potentially divisive ideas. Maybe our spiritual interaction will someday be as natural and pure as our project of creating a vegetable garden for the community. Everybody loves vegetables, or is that too a dogma?

I began to admire a group of local fundamentalist Christians. Their community is still strong and their revivals reveal a lot of enthusiasm. While everyone else is breaking down and falling into despair, this community remains strong. These communities tend to be a bit exclusive; if you don't strictly agree with their doctrines, then they usually try to persuade you. I have always avoided such societies because the all too common lingo of "you must accept Jesus as your personal savior" is always an aggressive blow to true understanding and kinship. I know other sincere Christians, and they have never tried any of that tricky business on me. They always accepted me as one of their own, but in spirit instead of forced confession.

Due to the strength of their dogma and exclusiveness, we have not been able to connect with these neighbors very closely until now. Perhaps this crisis is helping us to break down barriers of belief and prejudice that are rooted in our fears and insecurities as separated, suffering beings that don't understand our place in this creation? Like everybody else on this planet, they seek a safe refuge from chaos and despair. Their recent prayers here with us were mostly positive and for the well-being of others. To focus on that positive aspect of their spiritual practice will hopefully divert their attention from their tendencies to try to control and manipulate others. Call It Jesus or Buddha without the correct spirit and you only get a clown show full of lies and scandals. However, some people call It Jesus or Buddha and help other people truly understand the living spirit behind the teachings. <em>Advaita</em> or non-dualism goes beyond all names and forms and proclaims that the name of the spirit is only heard in silence and cannot be repeated or revealed except through the quietude of mystical vision. What is simply Is.  There is ultimately no point in trying to convince anybody of anything. Religion is eternally envious of Oneness. Why preach what is Self-evident? Trying to convince others is to admit separateness and is usually a power move for the ego. Compassion is all that is needed to create community, and it is the essential expression that burgeons out of the state of oneness with the Infinite.

There is very little moral order left in human society at this end of this capitalist era. The planet is being ravaged and is being coerced out of balance by human activity. The social order is descending into chaotic, brutal anarchy. The shrewd and powerful just do what they want and make laws to justify and implement their policies based on their exclusive interests. Corporations and governments become organized crime institutions under the hegemony of the global capitalist system. Multi-national corporations, federal reserve banks and their military industrial complex continue killing and/or controlling us all. Under the holocaust of globalization, the survivors are being forced to live off of the blood and sweat of others. Without great lies and psychological tricks of self-deception, very few people now live in good conscience. The first world is the parasite of the third world and the globalist legislation is but a low argument for parasitism. What is nature's response to our civilizations downward slide? Will we be shrugged off of the planet by the protective forces of nature?  If all is already brutal anarchy and the world only continues to slide into greater darkness and destruction, then why not consider a higher form of anarchy?

Advaita is pure anarchy, spiritual anarchy. Not even the best ideas control the mind under this philosophy, much less governments or institutions. The idea of Oneness of spirit in all beings, an "Oversoul" behind all particular minds, reveals the greatest inner freedom and bliss. At the same time this vision inspires a sacred duty toward ethical action in harmony with this common spirit. Instead of promoting and projecting an immature and selfish bourgeois freedom, one's conscience demands truth in all aspects of existence. Without the torch of conscience, lies and delusion distort one's freedom and make mundane, dualistic existence a cage for the soul. Congruence with one's deepest conscience and holding to it under all circumstances is the greatest defense against dualistic, separate thinking and all of its manifestations in our human world. Spiritual anarchy, the spontaneous, natural, and intuitive order and organization stemming from a state of social and existential chaos, has its roots in a profound respect for other beings that transcends name and form. Spirituality must be a truly unitive force instead of a divisive one. If it is true, then there are good fruits for all. If untrue, then it poisons the minds of individuals and creates disunity in the world. A newer, more conscious form of humanism may begin to evolve as Shakti, the divine force of nature, molds us into a higher form of being. Whatever doesn't evolve toward this practical ideal of Advaita, of essential oneness with the Infinite, is ultimately crushed under the wheels of the gods as divine mother nature (Shakti) reclaims all of these errant expressions through her destructive and regenerative forces.

Dogmatism and religion have little to do with <em>dharma</em>, which is the "essential" purpose of a human being. They are static containers of dead ideas, like garbage bins. Dharma is an ideological flow of evolution through thought and action and really takes you somewhere and causes a stir of movement deep in the soul. Dharma refers to the state of spiritual freedom whereby one is only capable of following nature's laws and a spiritual way of life. If one lives more by the laws of spirit than by customs, then religion, politics, and social conventions are mostly lies and weak prompts for desperate or blind mentalities that haven't found their place here on earth. Existential and social alienation create a state of spiritual ignorance which make one vulnerable to the many snares of dualistic thinking. Egoism is for infants. Materialism is for brutes and Barbies. Racism and imperialism are for Neanderthals. Nationalism is but a reunion of Cro-mags. Religion mostly just keeps people from having to face hard truths themselves, and thereby take a leap of faith by sheepishly following the established ideas of others.  Spiritual anarchists like Thoreau, Aurobindu and Tolstoy could not be contained within the confines of social convention and corrupt substitutes for dharma. Instead, they sought a higher union with both Nature and society and offered something new and bold for humanity. In this day and age it is hard to have faith in "systems" that don't sprout up from a natural order based on local necessity. Spiritual visionaries have always and will always respond to the needs of their local human and natural environments and offer a new vision for the world inspired by the genius of eternal dharma. These practical examples show how some great truths are implemented through the most practical and humane expressions.